Once around Mimmus. So Mus was
discovered by William Herschel in 1789
using his 40ft reflecting telescope uh
shown in the drawing in the center here.
An absolutely enormous piece of
equipment.
What he said was, "I continued my
observations constantly whenever the
weather would permit and the great light
of the 40 ft speculum was now of so much
use at I also on the 17th of September
detected the seventh satellite when it
was at its greatest preceding
elongation. So when it was at its
furthest point in its orbit ahead of
Saturn in the sky, he was able to see
it. is awfully close in and would be
difficult to see at many times of its uh
passage around the main planet.
The name comes from one of the giants in
Greek mythology and these names for the
moons of Saturn were all conjured up by
uh William Hershel's son John Herschel
and published in his book results of
astronomical observations made at the
good hope in 1847.
Size-wise, it's just under 400
kilometers in diameter, making it the
seventh largest of Saturn's moons, and
fairly round. It's just 10% oblate,
caused by tidal effects of Saturn's
gravity. And you can see it to scale
there with our moon and with the
asteroid series at the top. Minimus is
at the lower left there. Fairly round
looking, but quite a lot smaller even
than series.
It orbits close in just beyond the edge
of Saturn's rings, 186,000 kilometers
from the center of the planet, and takes
just under 23 hours to complete one
orbit, keeping one face towards Saturn
at all times. That so-called tidal lock,
the lowest energy configuration for such
things, happens to most moons of large
planets, especially if they're orbiting
close in.
It's less than 1/100,000th of the mass
of the Earth, just 3.75 * 10 19 kg. Uh,
so quite a light weight. And that tells
us that the density is just 1.15 grams
for every cubic centimeter, pointing to
it being mostly ice with a very small
amount of rock perhaps in a core. You
can see the marvelous picture of the
surface there. unwrapping that onto a
flat sheet uh rather distorts the polar
regions, but shows just how it's covered
in craters, although it's not the same
across all of the uh different regions.
Um, and you can see some interesting
patterns in this map if you know what
you're uh looking at. Particularly on
the left there, there's a very large
crater and on the right some sort of
circular feature that isn't a crater.
Well, we'll see.
A lovely view of this cratered surface
here just showing how rough it really
is. Uh it's amazing how steep and deep
some of these craters are. The biggest
is called Hershel Crater named after Sir
William and it's 139 km across.
That's onethird of Mus' own diameter. So
this hole in the surface goes to a depth
of 10 kilometers, raised the walls 5 km
above the average and has a tall central
peak 6 km high. Quite a big crater
indeed. You can see it at the top right
and a enlarged close flyby view from
Cassini there of the walls of the crater
and the central peak lower left.
On the far side of the moon, you see no
sign of the large crater, but you do see
these strange linear groove features.
And had such a a crater been in
proportion to the size of the Earth, it
would have been enormous. It would cover
an entire continent. Large enough to
nearly shatter Mimmus. In fact, at a
third the diameter, that's about the
largest you can possibly have for a
crater. Any object creating trying to
create a a hole in the ground larger
than that would probably destroy the
thing that it had hit completely. And
these linear features may well be the
shock waves disrupting the surface at
the antipode, the far side away from the
crater.
What's really interesting about Mus
though was discovered by studying its
orbit. Its orbit is slightly elliptical.
And as with Kepler's laws, the orbital
speed varies. When you're close to your
primary object, you move fast. And as
you climb away to the far side, the
extreme of your orbit, then you orbit
more slowly, thus maintaining the
angular momentum
that's trapped up, the orbital angular
momentum. But you also have to preserve
the rotational angular momentum of the
spin of the body. And
to do that at the same time is
impossible.
The moon will spin on its axis at a
constant rate. And even though that is
on average keeping one face towards the
primary because the orbital velocity is
changing, it librates. It creates this
effect we call libration which means
that sometimes the spin gets ahead and
sometimes behind. So you could see and
we get this with our moon. we can see
about 55% of the surface because we can
just peek around the corners as the
rotation uh and orbital velocities
compete with each other and this was
studied with minus and something very
strange was discovered either it has an
asymmetric core perhaps caused by the
impactor that created Hersel crater
making the core of the moon somewhat
irregular in shape. Or there is a liquid
water ocean allowing the core and the
shell to rotate differently, not being
tightly coupled to each other. And that
is the favored explanation these days.
There was suggestions that the lack of
cracking of the surface as we see at
things like Europa that orbits Jupiter
where there is a liquid water ocean and
an ice crust might suggest that it was
the asymmetric core theory. But the most
recent ideas suggest that uh actually
what's going on is that Mus is still in
the process of differentiating.
The core is gradually growing as heavier
material is sinking, more dense material
sinking to the center and expelling
water from it to form the water ocean
around it. Um, and there's a certain
amount of chemical evolution going on as
well, releasing water. So that means
that the water ocean may only be a
relatively new phenomenon, perhaps only
25 million years old. But I would say
that there's probably a lot of
assumptions gone into some of this
thinking and that further study would be
really helpful to try to understand
this. Now, these water oceans on these
ice worlds of the outer solar system are
fascinating for the possibility of
creating a biosphere, some sort of life
forms being able to evolve within them
because they seem to have all the
ingredients of the chemistry, the heat,
the protection of the ice crust and so
forth. Um, what this one's possibly
lacking is time. 25 million years is not
very long at all. So, it would be good
to answer that question.
Another effect of Mus' gravity is the
effect it has on Saturn's rings.
Saturn's rings shown here in this
marvelous photograph begin near the
planet with the darker crepe ring, the C
ring. Then you have the A ring, the
bright ring, and the B ring further out.
And
the gap between the A and the B- rings
is called the Cassini division. And it's
swept clean of particles by Mimmus. Not
because Mus is orbiting inside that gap,
but because it is further out and the
orbital period of any particle trying to
orbit in the gap region uh would be in a
bad integer relationship. So it would
keep catching up with and meeting Mimus
in the same place all the time and
gradually that would destabilize its
orbit moving it either inwards or
outwards to join the other ring
particles and clearing the gap. And all
the other gaps and bands that you see in
Saturn's rings are all caused by other
gravitational interactions with the host
of moons that Saturn has. I think the
last count was 274 when I put this video
together.
Also, in 1982,
two researchers, Cot and Ter reported
that they had found another moon
co-orbital with Mimmus orbiting in the
exact same orbit. Now, that's never been
confirmed and is still an open question,
but perhaps it is similar to the case of
the moon Janus, which seemed to be
misbehaving and was eventually explained
when its partner Epimetheus was
discovered, sharing its orbital region.
And in fact, these two
engage in a complex orbital dance, which
I won't go into today. That's the
subject of another video and I hope you
can uh look forward to seeing that one
at some point. But it seems that they
may not be the only case of this bizarre
orbital interaction.
And I'll leave you with this picture of
Mus and the Death Star. Uh the
comparison between Hersel crater and the
weapon of the Death Star has been drawn.
uh quite amusing really um especially
given the comments in the film itself of
uh people saying that's no moon but of
course Mimmus is a moon it's not some
alien artifact. Anyway, thanks very much
for listening and hope you've enjoyed
that one.